But whichever way Lydgate began to incline, there was something to make
him wince; and being a proud man, he was a little exasperated at being
obliged to wince. He did not like frustrating his own best purposes by
getting on bad terms with Bulstrode; he did not like voting against
Farebrother, and helping to deprive him of function and salary; and the
question occurred whether the additional forty pounds might not leave
the Vicar free from that ignoble care about winning at cards. Moreover,
Lydgate did not like the consciousness that in voting for Tyke he
should be voting on the side obviously convenient for himself. But
would the end really be his own convenience? Other people would say so,
and would allege that he was currying favor with Bulstrode for the sake
of making himself important and getting on in the world. What then? He
for his own part knew that if his personal prospects simply had been
concerned, he would not have cared a rotten nut for the banker’s
friendship or enmity. What he really cared for was a medium for his
work, a vehicle for his ideas; and after all, was he not bound to
prefer the object of getting a good hospital, where he could
demonstrate the specific distinctions of fever and test therapeutic
results, before anything else connected with this chaplaincy? For the
first time Lydgate was feeling the hampering threadlike pressure of
small social conditions, and their frustrating complexity. At the end
of his inward debate, when he set out for the hospital, his hope was
really in the chance that discussion might somehow give a new aspect to
the question, and make the scale dip so as to exclude the necessity for
voting. I think he trusted a little also to the energy which is
begotten by circumstances—some feeling rushing warmly and making
resolve easy, while debate in cool blood had only made it more
difficult. However it was, he did not distinctly say to himself on
which side he would vote; and all the while he was inwardly resenting
the subjection which had been forced upon him. It would have seemed
beforehand like a ridiculous piece of bad logic that he, with his
unmixed resolutions of independence and his select purposes, would find
himself at the very outset in the grasp of petty alternatives, each of
which was repugnant to him. In his student’s chambers, he had
prearranged his social action quite differently.

With this feeling uppermost, he continued to waive the question of the
chaplaincy, and to persuade himself that it was not only no proper
business of his, but likely enough never to vex him with a demand for
his vote. Lydgate, at Mr. Bulstrode’s request, was laying down plans
for the internal arrangements of the new hospital, and the two were
often in consultation. The banker was always presupposing that he could
count in general on Lydgate as a coadjutor, but made no special
recurrence to the coming decision between Tyke and Farebrother. When
the General Board of the Infirmary had met, however, and Lydgate had
notice that the question of the chaplaincy was thrown on a council of
the directors and medical men, to meet on the following Friday, he had
a vexed sense that he must make up his mind on this trivial Middlemarch
business. He could not help hearing within him the distinct declaration
that Bulstrode was prime minister, and that the Tyke affair was a
question of office or no office; and he could not help an equally
pronounced dislike to giving up the prospect of office. For his
observation was constantly confirming Mr. Farebrother’s assurance that
the banker would not overlook opposition. “Confound their petty
politics!” was one of his thoughts for three mornings in the meditative
process of shaving, when he had begun to feel that he must really hold
a court of conscience on this matter. Certainly there were valid things
to be said against the election of Mr. Farebrother: he had too much on
his hands already, especially considering how much time he spent on
non-clerical occupations. Then again it was a continually repeated
shock, disturbing Lydgate’s esteem, that the Vicar should obviously
play for the sake of money, liking the play indeed, but evidently
liking some end which it served. Mr. Farebrother contended on theory
for the desirability of all games, and said that Englishmen’s wit was
stagnant for want of them; but Lydgate felt certain that he would have
played very much less but for the money. There was a billiard-room at
the Green Dragon, which some anxious mothers and wives regarded as the
chief temptation in Middlemarch. The Vicar was a first-rate
billiard-player, and though he did not frequent the Green Dragon, there
were reports that he had sometimes been there in the daytime and had
won money. And as to the chaplaincy, he did not pretend that he cared
for it, except for the sake of the forty pounds. Lydgate was no
Puritan, but he did not care for play, and winning money at it had
always seemed a meanness to him; besides, he had an ideal of life which
made this subservience of conduct to the gaining of small sums
thoroughly hateful to him. Hitherto in his own life his wants had been
supplied without any trouble to himself, and his first impulse was
always to be liberal with half-crowns as matters of no importance to a
gentleman; it had never occurred to him to devise a plan for getting
half-crowns. He had always known in a general way that he was not rich,
but he had never felt poor, and he had no power of imagining the part
which the want of money plays in determining the actions of men. Money
had never been a motive to him. Hence he was not ready to frame excuses
for this deliberate pursuit of small gains. It was altogether repulsive
to him, and he never entered into any calculation of the ratio between
the Vicar’s income and his more or less necessary expenditure. It was
possible that he would not have made such a calculation in his own
case.